# Contents

[Introduction [2](#introduction)](#introduction)

[Section 1: Hands-On Query and Rule Examples
[3](#section-1-hands-on-query-and-rule-examples)](#section-1-hands-on-query-and-rule-examples)

[Section 2: Threat Hunting Workflows
[6](#section-2-threat-hunting-workflows)](#section-2-threat-hunting-workflows)

[Section 3: Automation in Practice
[8](#section-3-automation-in-practice)](#section-3-automation-in-practice)

[Section 4: Red and Purple Team Integration
[11](#section-4-red-and-purple-team-integration)](#section-4-red-and-purple-team-integration)

[Section 5: Data and Research Gaps
[13](#section-5-data-and-research-gaps)](#section-5-data-and-research-gaps)

[Section 6: Building an XDR Research Lab
[15](#section-6-building-an-xdr-research-lab)](#section-6-building-an-xdr-research-lab)

[Section 7: Practitioner Metrics
[17](#section-7-practitioner-metrics)](#section-7-practitioner-metrics)

[Section 8: Knowledge Sharing and Community
[19](#section-8-knowledge-sharing-and-community)](#section-8-knowledge-sharing-and-community)

[Conclusion [20](#conclusion)](#conclusion)

## Introduction

Extended Detection and Response (XDR) is rapidly maturing into the
backbone of modern cybersecurity operations. It integrates signals from
endpoints, networks, cloud, identity, and applications into a single
detection and response ecosystem.

In the first version of this article, I focused on strategy: aligning
XDR with NIST, ISO, MITRE ATT&CK, and Zero Trust. That version was aimed
at leaders and decision-makers who need to understand how XDR fits into
business and compliance priorities.

This second version is very different. It is a hands-on guide for
researchers and practitioners, the people who sit inside SOC consoles,
write detections, run red team simulations, automate playbooks, and
measure outcomes.

The gaps in the first version become the focus here:

-   Concrete queries and detection rules.

-   Step-by-step hunting workflows.

-   Practical automation playbooks.

-   How to integrate red and purple team testing.

-   Research challenges such as evasion and ML transparency.

-   Guidance on building a lab with limited resources.

-   Metrics that matter for practitioners.

-   Knowledge sharing for the wider community.

This article is structured as a manual-style field guide, with rules,
queries, workflows, and research exercises that can be directly applied.

## Section 1: Hands-On Query and Rule Examples

Detection engineering is the foundation of XDR. Out-of-the-box
detections are not enough. Practitioners must constantly author, test,
and tune rules.

Here are expanded examples across multiple MITRE ATT&CK techniques.

<img src="media/image3.png" style="width:3.551in;height:3.98687in" />

<img src="media/image4.png" style="width:3.54167in;height:3.54167in"
alt="A screenshot of a computer program AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

<img src="media/image5.png" style="width:4.04167in;height:4.04167in"
alt="A screenshot of a computer program AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

<img src="media/image6.png" style="width:4.0625in;height:4.0625in"
alt="A screenshot of a computer program AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

<img src="media/image7.png" style="width:4.0625in;height:4.0625in" />

*Practitioner Tip:* Always tie detections to ATT&CK techniques. After
running simulations, log whether the rule triggered, missed, or
generated noise. Build a table of detection effectiveness over time.

## Section 2: Threat Hunting Workflows

<img src="media/image8.png" style="width:6.5in;height:2.85972in"
alt="A diagram of a workflow AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

Threat hunting is about asking questions adversaries do not want you to
ask. Each hunt begins with a hypothesis, followed by a query,
validation, and outcome.

Hunt 1: Insider Exfiltration via OneDrive

-   Hypothesis: Insider uploads sensitive data via OneDrive.

-   Query: Detect large uploads by non-admin users.

-   Result: Confirm abnormal uploads.

-   Outcome: New detection rule created.

Hunt 2: Supply Chain Backdoor Installation

-   Hypothesis: A trusted vendor update introduces malicious binaries.

-   Workflow:

    1.  Review new process creation after update installation.

    2.  Check for unsigned executables.

    3.  Flag processes contacting suspicious domains.

-   Detection: Build rule for unverified binaries spawning network
    connections post-update.

Hunt 3: IoT Device Abuse

-   Hypothesis: Adversaries pivot through insecure IoT cameras.

-   Workflow:

    1.  Query network telemetry for unusual traffic from IoT VLAN.

    2.  Match against known C2 IPs.

    3.  Check for admin logins from IoT subnets.

-   Outcome: Add segmentation rule and detection logic for IoT
    anomalies.

Hunt 4: Privilege Escalation via Abnormal Logons

-   Hypothesis: Attackers gain elevated privileges through unusual
    logins.

-   Workflow:

    1.  Query for first-time logins from service accounts.

    2.  Cross-check with account creation logs.

    3.  Alert on logins outside typical operational hours.

*Practitioner Tip:* Maintain a “Hunting Journal.” Record hypotheses,
queries, results, and lessons learned. Over time, this journal becomes a
living research dataset.

## Section 3: Automation in Practice

<img src="media/image9.png" style="width:4.32292in;height:6.48438in"
alt="Generated image" />

Automation reduces response time and analyst fatigue. Here is an
extended playbook library.

Playbook 1: Phishing IOC

-   Quarantine email.

-   Block sender domain.

-   Notify user and SOC.

-   Search IOC across tenant.

Playbook 2: Ransomware IOC

-   Isolate endpoint.

-   Kill encryptor process.

-   Disable SMB shares.

-   Trigger recovery workflow.

Playbook 3: Insider Threat

-   Detect abnormal bulk transfers.

-   Suspend session.

-   Notify HR and security.

-   Disable account if confirmed.

Playbook 4: DDoS Detection

-   Detect volumetric spikes in network traffic.

-   Rate-limit affected IPs.

-   Notify network engineering.

-   Escalate to ISP if sustained.

Playbook 5: Cloud Misconfiguration

-   Detect publicly exposed storage buckets.

-   Auto-restrict access.

-   Alert cloud security admin.

-   Log compliance violation.

Playbook 6: Privilege Escalation Attempt

-   Detect suspicious new admin account creation.

-   Invalidate session tokens.

-   Notify SOC.

-   Trigger forensic review.

Practitioner Tip: Run purple team simulations quarterly to validate each
playbook.

## Section 4: Red and Purple Team Integration

<img src="media/image10.png" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in" />

XDR cannot be trusted blindly. Red and purple team exercises are the
most effective ways to validate detection and response workflows.

4.1 Why Red and Purple Teams Matter

-   Red Team: Simulates real adversaries. Tests XDR detections against
    stealthy tactics.

-   Purple Team: Red + Blue working together. Bridges the gap between
    attackers and defenders, ensures knowledge transfer.

-   Outcome for XDR: Identifies detection blind spots, validates
    playbooks, and provides measurable ATT&CK coverage.

4.2 Tools for Adversary Simulation

-   Atomic Red Team: Execute specific ATT&CK techniques. Lightweight and
    scriptable.

-   MITRE Caldera: Run end-to-end adversary campaigns with built-in
    adversary profiles.

-   Infection Monkey: Test lateral movement and privilege escalation in
    controlled environments.

-   Custom Scripts: PowerShell, Python, or C-based payloads to mimic
    adversary persistence or stealth.

4.3 Example Purple Team Campaign

-   Objective: Test if XDR detects lateral movement via PsExec.

-   Execution:

    1.  Red team runs PsExec to pivot between systems.

    2.  Blue team monitors XDR logs.

    3.  Detection gap identified.

    4.  Sigma rule authored and deployed.

    5.  Retest confirms detection.

-   Result: Coverage against ATT&CK T1570 (Lateral Tool Transfer).

4.4 Metrics from Red/Purple Testing

-   Number of ATT&CK techniques simulated.

-   Techniques detected vs undetected.

-   Average remediation time per simulated incident.

-   Detection quality score (High Confidence vs Low Fidelity).

*Practitioner Note*: Maintain an ATT&CK coverage dashboard updated after
every exercise. This becomes the “health report” of your XDR system.

## Section 5: Data and Research Gaps

<img src="media/image11.png" style="width:6.5in;height:6.5in"
alt="A diagram of a test AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

Detection engineering is never complete. Researchers must continuously
probe data quality, evasion, and ML transparency.

5.1 Measuring False Positives and False Negatives

-   Method: Track alerts vs confirmed incidents weekly.

-   Formula:

    -   False Positive Rate = False Positives ÷ Total Alerts

    -   False Negative Rate = Undetected Incidents ÷ Total Incidents

-   Target Benchmarks:

    -   FP \< 20 percent.

    -   FN as close to 0 percent as possible.

5.2 Evasion Testing

-   Living-off-the-land binaries (LOLBins): certutil.exe, mshta.exe,
    wmic.exe.

-   Encrypted Channels: Simulate C2 over HTTPS, DNS tunneling, QUIC.

-   Obfuscation: Use script encoding, binary packing, or command
    concatenation to test XDR resilience.

5.3 ML and AI Transparency

-   Validate AI alerts against controlled simulations.

-   Check if the platform explains reasoning (anomaly scores,
    contributing factors).

-   Identify “black box” detections that analysts cannot verify easily.

5.4 Research Challenges for Practitioners

-   Can XDR detect malware delivered through cloud sync tools (Google
    Drive, Dropbox)?

-   How does XDR handle encrypted outbound traffic at scale?

-   Are ML models biased toward common attacks and blind to advanced
    evasion?

*Practitioner Note*: Publish blind spot findings internally and
externally. This creates accountability and accelerates rule
improvement.

## Section 6: Building an XDR Research Lab

<img src="media/image12.png" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in"
alt="A diagram of a software structure AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

A functional XDR research lab does not require enterprise budgets. It
requires thoughtful design.

6.1 Minimum Viable Lab

-   VMs: At least 2 Windows, 1 Linux.

-   EDR Agents: Wazuh, OSQuery, Sysmon.

-   Log Pipeline: Forward logs to Elastic, Splunk, or Sentinel trial.

-   Simulation Tools: Atomic Red Team, Caldera.

6.2 Intermediate Lab Setup

-   Add an Active Directory domain controller for identity telemetry.

-   Deploy Suricata or Zeek for network telemetry.

-   Connect to a cloud tenant (Azure free trial, AWS free tier) for
    cloud logs.

-   Integrate SOAR for automation testing.

6.3 Advanced Lab Setup

-   Containerized environment with Kubernetes.

-   IoT/OT devices simulated via emulators (Modbus, MQTT).

-   Hybrid lab bridging on-prem and cloud workloads.

-   Threat intelligence ingestion pipeline.

6.4 Lab Research Exercises

-   Run credential dumping via Atomic Red Team.

-   Observe log pipeline performance under load.

-   Measure detection latency from event to alert.

-   Test automation workflows in a safe environment.

*Practitioner Note*: Document lab architecture and reuse it for team
training, onboarding, and red/purple exercises.

## Section 7: Practitioner Metrics

<img src="media/image13.png" style="width:6.5in;height:4.33333in"
alt="A screenshot of a dashboard AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

Executives look at MTTR and ROI. Practitioners need operational metrics
that track detection and hunting maturity.

7.1 Key Metrics for SOC Practitioners

-   Hunt-to-Detect Ratio: Hunts that evolve into permanent detections.
    Target: at least 50 percent.

-   Analyst Triage Time: Average time to validate an alert. Benchmark:
    \< 10 minutes.

-   Automation Coverage: Percentage of incidents resolved by playbooks.
    Target: \> 40 percent.

-   Detection Effectiveness: Percentage of adversary simulations
    detected. Target: \> 80 percent.

-   Signal-to-Noise Ratio: Valid alerts ÷ Total alerts. Higher ratio =
    healthier SOC.

7.2 Example Monthly SOC Report

-   Hunts conducted: 30.

-   Hunts converted to detections: 18.

-   Average triage time: 9 minutes.

-   Automation coverage: 42 percent.

-   Detection effectiveness: 85 percent.

-   Signal-to-noise: 1 valid alert for every 3 total alerts.

7.3 Continuous Feedback

-   Conduct retrospectives monthly.

-   Identify “alert fatigue hotspots.”

-   Prioritize automation for repetitive alerts.

*Practitioner Note*: Build a simple metrics dashboard in Grafana or
Kibana and update it automatically from XDR logs.

## Section 8: Knowledge Sharing and Community

<img src="media/image14.png" style="width:6.5in;height:6.5in"
alt="A diagram of a knowledge sharing cycle AI-generated content may be incorrect." />

Knowledge sharing transforms individual SOC maturity into collective
cyber defense.

8.1 Why Share?

-   Adversaries collaborate. Defenders must too.

-   Shared detections increase resilience across industries.

-   Publishing research builds credibility for practitioners.

8.2 What to Share?

-   Detection Rules: Sigma, YARA, Suricata signatures.

-   ATT&CK Heatmaps: Coverage before and after hunts.

-   Research Notes: Case studies of evasion or anomaly detection.

-   Open Source Tools: Scripts for simulation, detection, or automation.

8.3 Where to Share?

-   SigmaHQ, GitHub repositories.

-   ISACs (Financial Services ISAC, Automotive ISAC, Healthcare ISAC).

-   LinkedIn or Medium articles for practitioner outreach.

-   Internal wikis and knowledge bases.

8.4 Case Study: Sharing Detection Lessons

A financial SOC discovered evasion using mshta.exe for script execution.
Instead of keeping it private, they published a Sigma rule. Within
weeks, other SOCs validated and adopted it, and the detection became
part of a wider community rule set.

8.5 Culture of Contribution

Encourage analysts to blog or publish rules monthly. Rotate
responsibility so every team member contributes.

*Practitioner Note*: Build “detection sprints” where teams create,
validate, and publish new detection content in cycles.

## Conclusion

With these expanded sections, the practitioner’s guide to XDR becomes
not only a manual for daily SOC operations but also a framework for
research, experimentation, validation, and contribution.

By integrating red and purple teams, experimenting with data gaps,
building scalable labs, tracking practitioner-centric metrics, and
sharing knowledge with the community, XDR is transformed from a vendor
tool into a research-driven, adaptive defense platform.
